>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, AUGUST 27: A
NATIONAL DAY OF MOURNING IN
ITALY, FOLLOWING THIS WEEK'S
EARTHQUAKE THAT KILLED NEARLY
300 PEOPLE.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
BRINGING BACK MANUFACTURING JOBS
TO THE UNITED STATES.
>> OVER TIME, AS LABOR RATES
CONTINUE TO RISE IN OTHER PARTS
OF THE WORLD AT A FASTER RATE
THAN THEY ARE HERE IN AMERICA,
IT WOULD ACTUALLY BECOME COST
COMPETITIVE TO DO IT HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT, ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
AS ITALY MARKED A NATIONAL DAY
OF MOURNING, RESCUE WORKERS
SPENT A FOURTH DAY SEARCHING FOR
SURVIVORS OF THE DEVASTATING
EARTHQUAKE, BUT FOUND NONE.
ITALIAN AUTHORITIES SAY AT LEAST
291 PEOPLE WERE KILLED WHEN THE
OVERNIGHT QUAKE STRUCK MAINLY IN
THREE TOWNS ON WEDNESDAY.
ALMOST 400 INJURED ARE IN
HOSPITALS.
TODAY, ITALY'S PRESIDENT AND
PRIME MINISTER ATTENDED A STATE
FUNERAL FOR 35 OF THOSE VICTIMS,
INCLUDING TWO CHILDREN IN TINY
WHITE COFFINS.
THE WORST HIT TOWN IS AMATRICE,
AND THAT'S WHERE NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY JOINS US.
CHRISTOPHER, THE FUNERALS FOR
ALL THESE PEOPLE BEGAN TODAY.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IN FACT, TODAY WAS DECLARED A
NATIONAL DAY OF MOURNING.
THE PRIME MINISTER AND PRESIDENT
BOTH WERE HERE, IN ATTENDANCE.
NOW, IT WAS ORIGINALLY SCHEDULED
TO BE A DAY OF CELEBRATION.
TODAY WOULD HAVE MARKED THE 50th
ANNIVERSARY OF THE TOWN OF
AMATRICE'S FAMOUS PASTA DISH,
THE PASTA ALL' AMATRICIANA.
AMATRICE IS THE TOWN WHERE I'M
STANDING RIGHT NOW, AND IT WAS
AT THE EPICENTER OF THIS QUAKE.
ONE OF THE SAD STORIES YOU COME
ACROSS IS THE FACT THAT, BECAUSE
OF THIS FOOD FESTIVAL, THE
TOWN'S POPULATION PRACTICALLY
DOUBLED BECAUSE OF ALL THE
VISITORS WHO WERE HERE FROM
ELSEWHERE IN ITALY AND EVEN
FURTHER AFIELD.
OF COURSE THAT CELEBRATION DID
NOT TAKE PLACE.
INSTEAD THERE WAS A STATE
FUNERAL IN A TOWN NEARBY HERE.
THERE WERE LOTS OF SAD STORIES
TOLD THERE.
ONE, HOWEVER, WAS SORT OF
UPLIFTING; IT WAS A STORY OF TWO
SISTERS, ONE WHO ACTUALLY SEEMED
TO HAVE SACRIFICED HERSELF,
GRABBING ON TO HER LITTLE SISTER
WHO IS FOUR YEARS OLD.
THE BIG SISTER DIED BUT THE
LITTLE SISTER WAS ABLE TO
SURVIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT
THE RESCUE TURNING INTO RECOVERY
EFFORTS?
WHAT ABOUT THOSE WHO ARE STILL
MISSING?
>> WELL, IN THIS CITY THERE ARE
APPROXIMATELY 20 PEOPLE WHO ARE
STILL UNACCOUNTED FOR.
TECHNICALLY THE RESCUE EFFORT IS
STILL ONGOING.
THERE IS A 100-HOUR WINDOW
IN WHICH RESCUERS CAN STILL
EXPECT TO FIND, OR HOPE TO FIND
SURVIVORS, IF THE SURVIVORS HAVE
SOME ACCESS TO WATER.
HOWEVER, THAT WINDOW IS NOW
CLOSING, SO THE RESCUERS I SPEAK
TO REALLY DON'T SEEM OPTIMISTIC.
THEY TELL ME THAT THEY ONLY
EXPECT TO RECOVER BODIES, AT
THIS POINT.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS IS NOT A
REGION THAT'S UNFAMILIAR WITH
EARTHQUAKES, SOME OF THE
BUILDINGS BEHIND YOU WERE
SUPPOSED TO BE RETRO-FITTED TO
BE STRONGER, WHAT HAPPENED?
>> THAT'S ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
WELL, THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
IN FACT, A STATE PROSECUTOR HAS
OPENED UP OVER A HUNDRED PROBES
INTO BUILDINGS THAT ALLEGEDLY
SHOULD HAVE BEEN STABLE, SHOULD
HAVE BEEN ABLE TO WITHSTAND A
QUAKE LIKE THIS.
THE QUESTION IS, WHY DIDN'T
THEY?
WAS IT A QUESTION OF, THE MONEY
NEVER GETTING TO WHERE IT SHOULD
BE?
WAS IT A QUESTION OF CORRUPTION?
IN FACT, ITALY IS A COUNTRY THAT
IS NO STRANGER WHEN IT COMES TO
CORRUPTION.
THAT IS A QUESTION THAT WE'RE
HEARING ASKED WHEN IT COMES TO
THE RECONSTRUCTION PERIOD.
IN FACT, THE ITALIAN
ANTI-CORRUPTION CZAR SPOKE OUT
AGAINST THAT TODAY, WARNING
AGAINST MAFIA INFILTRATION.
ITALY, AS YOU KNOW, IS A SEISMIC
REGION, IT'S HAD LOTS OF
EARTHQUAKES IN THE PAST.
THERE HAVE BEEN CASES OF THESE
BIG LUCRATIVE BUILDING CONTRACTS
GOING OUT TO PEOPLE WITH MAFIA
CONNECTIONS.
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT OFFICIALS
ARE LOOKING OUT FOR RIGHT NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY JOINING US
FROM AMATRICE, ITALY.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: IN BANGLADESH,
SECURITY FORCES SAID TODAY THEY
SHOT AND KILLED THE SUSPECTED
RINGLEADER OF LAST MONTH'S
TERRORIST ATTACK ON A CAFE THAT
LEFT 22 PEOPLE DEAD.
VICTIMS FROM THAT ATTACK
INCLUDED THREE STUDENTS ENROLLED
AT U.S. COLLEGES.
POLICE SAID THE LEADER WAS A
30-YEAR OLD BANGLADESH-BORN
CANADIAN CITIZEN WHO HAD BEEN IN
CHARGE OF ISIS OPERATIONS IN
BANGLADESH.
POLICE SAY HE AND TWO OTHER ISIS
MILITANTS WERE KILLED DURING A
RAID ON A BUILDING WHERE THEY
HAD BEEN HIDING ON THE OUTSKIRTS
OF THE CAPITAL OF DHAKA.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY IS
SCHEDULED TO VISIT DHAKA ON
MONDAY TO DISCUSS THE ISIS
THREAT AND THE STRING OF
KILLINGS OF RELIGIOUS MINORITIES
AND OTHERS IN PREDOMINANTLY-
MUSLIM BANGLADESH.
RUSSIAN OFFICIALS SAY AT LEAST
17 MIGRANT WORKERS FROM THE
FORMER SOVIET REPUBLIC OF
KYRGYZSTAN DIED TODAY WHEN A
FIRE RACED THROUGH A PRINTING
PLANT WAREHOUSE IN MOSCOW.
THE OFFICIALS SAY ALL THE
VICTIMS WERE WOMEN, WHO WERE
TRAPPED IN A DRESSING ROOM AS
THEY CHANGED INTO THEIR WORK
CLOTHES.
ONE OFFICIAL SAID THE FIRE
APPARENTLY WAS STARTED BY A
FAULTY LAMP ON A FLOOR WHERE
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS WERE STORED,
AND SPREAD QUICKLY THROUGH AN
ELEVATOR SHAFT TO THE DRESSING
ROOM.
AS MANY AS HALF A MILLION PEOPLE
FROM THE IMPOVERISHED FORMER
SOVIET REPUBLIC ARE BELIEVED TO
WORK IN RUSSIA.
COMPETING WITH CHINA FOR
INFLUENCE IN RESOURCE-RICH
AFRICA, JAPANESE PRIME MINISTER
SHINZO ABE SAID TODAY THAT JAPAN
WILL INVEST $30 BILLION OVER THE
NEXT THREE YEARS TO NURTURE THE
CONTINENT'S ECONOMIC GROWTH AND
INFRASTRUCTURE.
ABE TOLD A SUMMIT OF AFRICAN
LEADERS IN NAIROBI, KENYA, THE
MONEY WILL UPGRADE ELECTRICITY
GENERATION AND TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEMS, AND INVEST IN HEALTH
CARE AND EDUCATION.
BY COMPARISON, CHINA PLEDGED
$60 BILLION AT A SIMILAR AFRICAN
SUMMIT LAST YEAR, AND HAS FAR
OUTSPENT JAPAN AND THE U.S. ON
THE CONTINENT.
IN NORTH CAROLINA, TRANSGENDER-
RIGHTS ACTIVISTS ARE CALLING
YESTERDAY'S RULING BY A FEDERAL
JUDGE A VICTORY.
U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE THOMAS
SCHROEDER BLOCKED ENFORCEMENT OF
A PROVISION OF THE STATE'S
H.B.-2 LAW, WHICH REQUIRES
PEOPLE TO USE BATHROOMS IN
SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS
THAT CORRESPOND TO THE GENDER ON
THEIR BIRTH CERTIFICATES.
INSTEAD, SCHROEDER RULED, TWO
TRANSGENDER STUDENTS AND AN
EMPLOYEE AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
NORTH CAROLINA MUST BE ALLOWED
TO USE BATHROOMS MATCHING THEIR
GENDER IDENTITY.
UNIVERSITY EMPLOYEE JOAQUIN
CARCANO SAID, "HOPEFULLY THIS IS
THE START TO CHIPPING AWAY AT
THE INJUSTICE OF H.B.-2."
JUDGE SCHROEDER, APPOINTED BY
PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH, ALSO
SAID THE PLAINTIFFS ARE LIKELY
TO SUCCEED AT TRIAL THIS
NOVEMBER IN ARGUING THAT H.B.-2
VIOLATES TITLE-NINE, THE FEDERAL
LAW THAT PROHIBITS GENDER
DISCRIMINATION IN SCHOOLS.
TODAY, HILLARY CLINTON RECEIVED
HER FIRST OFFICIAL NATIONAL
SECURITY BRIEFING, AS THE
DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE.
THE TWO-HOUR SESSION WITH
INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS OCCURRED
AT AN F.B.I. OFFICE IN
WESTCHESTER COUNTY, NEW YORK,
NEAR HER HOME.
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE
DONALD TRUMP RECEIVED HIS FIRST
SECURITY BRIEFING EARLIER THIS
MONTH.
TRUMP CAMPAIGNED TODAY IN IOWA,
NOW RATED BY THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS AS ONE THE SIX CLOSEST
"TOSS UP" STATES IN THE
ELECTION.
THE OTHER CLOSE STATES ARE
FLORIDA, OHIO, NEVADA, NEW
HAMPSHIRE AND NORTH CAROLINA.
>> Sreenivasan: MEMBERS OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA
COMMUNITY REACT TO THIS WEEK'S
RULING ON THE STATE'S H.B.-2
LAW.
LEARN MORE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: WITH THE ECONOMY
OCCUPYING A CENTRAL PLACE IN
THIS YEAR'S ELECTION, BOTH
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES ARE
PLEDGING TO CREATE MORE JOBS.
ACCORDING TO THE FEDERAL LABOR
DEPARTMENT, THE UNITED STATES
LOST NEARLY SIX MILLION
MANUFACTURING JOBS BETWEEN THE
YEARS 2000 AND 2010.
BUT SOME JOBS, ONCE THOUGHT
FOREVER GONE OFFSHORE TO CHEAPER
LABOR, ARE STARTING TO COME
BACK.
IT'S CALLED RESHORING, AND
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER HAS THE STORY.
THIS SIGNATURE SEGMENT IS PART
OF OUR ONGOING SERIES "CHASING
THE DREAM," ABOUT ECONOMIC
OPPORTUNITY IN AMERICA.
>> Reporter: TO WALK INTO THE
BOLLMAN HAT COMPANY, IN
ADAMSTOWN, PENNSYLVANIA, IS TO
WALK INTO THE PAST.
SINCE 1868, AMERICA'S OLDEST HAT
MAKER HAS MADE EVERYTHING FROM
FEDORAS TO COWBOY HATS.
AND EACH PART OF THE PROCESS--
FROM THE WAY THE WOOL IS CLEANED
AND FELTED, THE MATERIALS
PRESSED, AND HATS ARE SHAPED--
IS A THROWBACK TO AN OLDER
AMERICA.
WHILE STILL MAKING HATS LARGELY
THE SAME WAY IT DID IN ITS
EARLIEST DAYS, THIS PAST JANUARY
THE EMPLOYEE-OWNED COMPANY ADDED
A NEW BRAND TO THEIR
PENNSYLVANIA ASSEMBLY LINE--
KANGOL.
COMING TO PROMINENCE IN THE U.S.
IN THE 1980s, THE BRITISH BRAND
WAS AN INTEGRAL PART OF
HIP HOP-- A CONSTANT ACCESSORY
OF EARLY RAP LUMINARIES LIKE
RUN DMC, GRANDMASTER FLASH AND
LL COOL J.
FOUNDED IN 1938, KANGOL HATS
WERE MADE IN THE U.K. FOR ABOUT
60 YEARS BEFORE MOVING TO CHINA.
IN 2001, THE BOLLMAN HAT COMPANY
ACQUIRED THE GLOBAL LICENSE TO
DESIGN, PRODUCE, AND DISTRIBUTE
KANGOL HEADWEAR.
THEN IN 2014, THE CHINESE PLANT
PRODUCING THE KANGOL HATS CLOSED
IN ORDER TO MOVE TO BANGLADESH
FOR CHEAPER WAGES, FORCING
BOLLMAN TO FIND A NEW PRODUCTION
FACILITY.
AND LIKE ITS ROLE IN HIP HOP,
KANGOL IS ONCE AGAIN
TRENDSETTING, JOINING A GROWING
ROSTER OF PRODUCTS FORMERLY MADE
IN CHINA.
THROUGH A COMBINATION OF STATE
GRANTS, ONLINE FUNDRAISING AND
COMPANY INVESTMENT, BOLLMAN
BOUGHT AND SHIPPED THE KANGOL
KNITTING MACHINES FROM CHINA TO
ADAMSTOWN.
DON RONGIONE IS THE COMPANY'S
C.E.O.
HOW DIFFICULT HAS IT BEEN TO
LEARN HOW TO USE THESE MACHINES?
>> EXTRAORDINARILY DIFFICULT.
>> Reporter: WHILE SOME KANGOL
HATS ARE STILL PRODUCED IN
OFFSHORE FACILITIES, RONGIONE
SAYS U.S.-BASED PRODUCTION LOOKS
INCREASINGLY ATTRACTIVE.
CHINESE WAGES HAVE RISEN BETWEEN
ABOUT 10% AND 15% A YEAR AND
MORE AND MORE CUSTOMERS SHOP
ONLINE AND EXPECT FASTER
DELIVERY TIMES.
>> IF WE GET TO THE SAME
EFFICIENCY LEVELS THAT WE HAD IN
ASIA-- USING U.S. LABOR RATES--
OUR COST IS FAIRLY CLOSE.
WE DON'T HAVE TO TRANSPORT THE
PRODUCT, AND OVER TIME, AS LABOR
RATES CONTINUE TO RISE-- IN
OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD AT A
FASTER RATE THAN THEY ARE HERE
IN AMERICA, IT WOULD ACTUALLY
BECOME COST-COMPETITIVE TO DO IT
HERE.
>> Reporter: SUCH CALCULATIONS
ARE MUSIC TO HARRY MOSER'S EARS.
AS THE FOUNDER OF THE RESHORING
INITIATIVE, A GROUP WORKING TO
BRING MANUFACTURING JOBS BACK TO
THE U.S., MOSER SPENDS A GREAT
DEAL OF HIS TIME TRYING TO SELL
THIS TYPE OF COST CALCULATION TO
AMERICAN COMPANIES.
>> WHEN THEY FIRST WENT
OFFSHORE, SAY, TO CHINA, THE
CHINESE WAGES WERE SO LOW THAT
THE PRICE DIFFERENTIAL WAS, SAY,
30% OR 40%, BUT NOW THAT THE
CHINESE WAGES HAVE COME UP, THAT
GAP MIGHT ONLY BE 15% OR 20%.
>> Reporter: MOSER BELIEVES
INCREASED CHINESE WAGES MAKE IT
DIFFICULT TO JUSTIFY THE OTHER
COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH
OFFSHORING, LIKE SHIPPING,
DELIVERY DELAYS, AND THE
OVERHEAD THAT COMES WITH
MAINTAINING LARGE INVENTORIES.
>> SO, ALL THESE THINGS THAT,
EACH ONE MIGHT ONLY BE 1% OR 2%,
BUT WHEN YOU HAVE 30 OF THEM AT
1% OR 2%, YOU CAN MAKE UP FOR A
15% OR 20% PRICE DIFFERENCE FROM
CHINA.
>> Reporter: TODAY, HE'S
PITCHING HIS RESHORING
INITIATIVE AT MISSISSIPPI STATE
UNIVERSITY IN STARKVILLE,
MISSISSIPPI.
>> SO MY FAVORITE SINGLE CASE
ABOUT RESHORING IS G.E.
THEY BROUGHT BACK APPLIANCE
PRODUCTION TO AN APPLIANCE PARK
IN LOUISVILLE, KENTUCKY.
>> Reporter: MOSER ARGUES,
COMPANIES COULD AFFORD TO BRING
NEARLY A MILLION JOBS BACK TO
THE U.S.
>> WE CONCLUDE THAT ABOUT 25% OF
WHAT IS OFFSHORE TODAY WOULD
COME BACK IF COMPANIES DID THE
MATH.
>> Reporter: WHILE U.S.
EMPLOYMENT IN MANUFACTURING
STARTED DECLINING IN THE EARLY
1980s, THE MASSIVE JOB LOSSES
REALLY DIDN'T START UNTIL THE
MILLENNIUM.
BETWEEN 2000 AND 2009, CLOSE TO
SIX MILLION MANUFACTURING JOBS
WERE LOST.
BUT IN 2010, THE HEMORRHAGING
STARTED TO SLOW.
MOSER SAYS, SINCE THEN, 265,000
MANUFACTURING JOBS WITH AROUND
900 COMPANIES HAVE BEEN CREATED
OR RESHORED TO THE UNITED
STATES.
>> SO, WE'VE GONE FROM A NET
LOSS OF OVER 200,000 A YEAR, TO
A NET LOSS OF ZERO, OR MAYBE
SLIGHTLY POSITIVE, SO HUGE
IMPROVEMENT.
>> Reporter: THE JOBS ARE IN
INDUSTRIES AS DIVERSE AS
APPLIANCES, AUTOS, AND
FURNITURE.
IN JUNE, EMERALD HOME
FURNISHINGS, A TACOMA,
WASHINGTON-BASED COMPANY, MOVED
SOME OF ITS PRODUCTION FROM
CHINA TO THIS FACILITY IN NEW
ALBANY, MISSISSIPPI.
MANAGER TERRY TREADAWAY SAYS THE
INTERNET AND THE NEED FOR FASTER
DELIVERY DROVE EMERALD'S
DECISION TO RESHORE.
>> I'VE BEEN IN FURNITURE FOR
34 YEARS.
AND I HAVE TRAVELED IN CHINA,
BUT CHINA TODAY AND THE CHINA
20 YEARS AGO ARE DIFFERENT.
SO, THERE ARE CHANGES COMING.
AND I THINK, YOU KNOW, WE'LL SEE
MORE AND MORE JOBS MOVE BACK TO
THE STATES.
>> Reporter: BEFORE, A COUCH
WOULD TAKE AS LONG AS SIX WEEKS
TO SHIP FROM CHINA TO A U.S.
CUSTOMER.
FROM NEW ALBANY, IT CAN BE BUILT
AND SHIPPED TO THE CUSTOMER IN
SEVEN TO 12 DAYS.
MISSISSIPPI ALSO SWEETENED THE
DEAL.
EMERALD HOME FURNISHINGS
RECEIVED A $1.3 MILLION
INCENTIVE FROM THE STATE OF
MISSISSIPPI TO OPEN THIS
FACILITY IN NEW ALBANY.
IN RETURN, THEY PROMISED TO HIRE
150 NEW WORKERS OVER THE NEXT
THREE YEARS.
WHEN THEY OPENED THE PLANT THIS
PAST JUNE, THE COMPANY SAYS IT
RECEIVED NEARLY 300 APPLICATIONS
FOR 35 POSITIONS.
THEY PLAN TO HIRE AN ADDITIONAL
25 PEOPLE BEFORE THE YEARS' END.
>> STARTING MINIMUM WAGE IS $10
TO $12 AND UP TO $16, $17 AN
HOUR.
THE COMPANY PAYS 75% OF THE
EMPLOYEE'S HEALTH INSURANCE AND
50% OF THEIR DEPENDENTS.
WE ALSO HAVE 401(K).
>> Reporter: IN NEIGHBORING
ALABAMA, HESSAIRE, WHICH MAKES
COOLING MACHINES IN HOLLY POND,
TOOK OVER THIS SHUTTERED JEANS
DISTRIBUTING CENTER IN APRIL,
AFTER THEY RECEIVED A TAX
ABATEMENT FROM THE TOWN.
PRESIDENT JERRY FAN PURCHASED
THE BUSINESS 11 YEARS AGO, AT
THE TIME WHEN IT PRODUCED NEARLY
ALL OF ITS PRODUCTS IN CHINA.
FAN SAYS HIS DECISION TO RESHORE
JOBS IN ALABAMA WAS INFLUENCED
BY THE DESIRE TO BE CLOSER TO
HIS CUSTOMERS AND THE
AVAILABILITY OF A MORE SKILLED
WORKFORCE, EVEN IF THAT MEANT
PAYING HIGHER WAGES.
>> PART OF OUR MANUFACTURING IS
THAT WE HAVE TO PROVIDE A
CERTAIN LEVEL OF CUSTOMER
SERVICE.
AND THE PEOPLE HERE WORKING FOR
US, THE SKILL LEVELS, EVEN IN
HOLLY POND, WE FIND THEY'RE
PROBLEM SOLVERS, AND THEY'RE
MOTIVATED, SO THOSE ARE VERY
IMPORTANT CONSIDERATIONS.
>> Reporter: ROBERT ATKINSON IS
AMONG THE SKEPTICS OF THE IMPACT
OF THESE RECENT MANUFACTURING
DEVELOPMENTS.
HE'S PRESIDENT OF THE
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND
INNOVATION FOUNDATION, IN
WASHINGTON, D.C.
>> WE'RE NOT ENGAGED IN A
RENAISSANCE.
WE'RE ENGAGED IN A PARTIAL
RECOVERY.
WHAT WE ARE IN THE MIDST OF IS,
IT IS NOT SO BAD AS IT USED TO
BE.
SO, YEAH, MANUFACTURING IS
GROWING A LITTLE BIT, BUT WE
LOST OVER A THIRD OF OUR
MANUFACTURING JOBS IN THE 2000s.
IT WAS DECIMATED.
AND WE'RE RUNNING, ESSENTIALLY,
AN $800 BILLION TRADE DEFICIT.
>> Reporter: ATKINSON SAYS HARRY
MOSER'S MODEL IS GOOD, BUT
ABSENT SUBSTANTIAL CHANGES IN
TAX, TARIFF, AND TRADE POLICIES,
THE U.S. WILL NOT RETURN TO IT
FORMER MANUFACTURING MIGHT.
>> EVERY OTHER COUNTRY'S PUTTING
IN PLACE A MANUFACTURING
STRATEGY-- BETTER TAX INCENTIVES
FOR INVESTING IN RESEARCH,
BETTER TAX INCENTIVES FOR
INVESTING IN MACHINERY,
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS FOR
THEIR WORKERS.
YOU KNOW, IF WE JUST SORT OF SIT
BACK AND THINK WE'RE GOING TO
WIN, WIN THE RACE BY THE FACT
THAT WE'RE AMERICANS, WELL,
WE'RE NOT.
>> WE'VE PROVEN THAT THE COST
GAP IS LOW ENOUGH WITH CHINA AND
COUNTRIES LIKE THAT, WE CAN
BRING BACK HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS.
SO, WITH SOME IMPROVEMENTS IN
OUR TERMS OF TRADE, IN OUR
COMPETITIVENESS, IT'S REASONABLE
THAT WE WILL BRING BACK
MILLIONS.
>> Reporter: UNTIL THAT HAPPENS,
THE FUTURE OF AMERICAN
MANUFACTURING MAY WELL BE
DETERMINED BY THE EFFORTS
ALREADY UNDERWAY IN PLACES LIKE
NEW ALBANY, HOLLY POND OR
ADAMSTOWN.
WOULD YOU MAKE THIS BET AGAIN?
>> AT THIS POINT, WE'RE STILL IN
THE EARLY STAGES OF CLIMBING
THIS MOUNTAIN.
OUR COSTS ARE WAY OUT OF LINE
WITH WHERE THEY NEED TO BE.
AND WE'VE MASTERED SOME OF THE
QUALITY, BUT NOT ALL OF THE
QUALITY.
SO, THIS STORY ENDS VERY HAPPILY
IF THIS IS SUCCESSFUL AND WE'RE
MAKING PROFITS AND PROVIDING FOR
OUR EMPLOYEE-OWNERS, WHICH IS
OUR MISSION AS A COMPANY.
BUT IT ENDS VERY SADLY IF
AMERICA'S OLDEST HAT MAKER CAN'T
MAKE THIS HAPPEN AND BE
SUCCESSFUL AND SURVIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT OBAMA
HAS DECIDED TO QUADRUPLE THE
SIZE OF A FEDERAL MARINE
PRESERVE AROUND HIS HOME STATE
OF HAWAII.
BY AN EXECUTIVE ORDER ISSUED
YESTERDAY, THE PAPAHANAUMOKUAKEA
MARINE NATIONAL MONUMENT WILL
BECOME THE LARGEST ECOLOGICAL
PRESERVE ON THE PLANET,
ENCOMPASSING MORE THAN 580,000
SQUARE MILES OF LAND AND SEA.
FOR MORE ON THE AREA AND SPECIES
THAT WILL BE PROTECTED, I'M
JOINED BY MATT RAND, DIRECTOR OF
THE PEW CHARITABLE TRUSTS'
GLOBAL OCEAN LEGACY PROJECT.
SO, MATT, TELL ME, WHY THIS
PATCH OF OCEAN, WHAT IS SO
SPECIAL ABOUT IT?
>> WELL, THIS IS AMAZING PLACE
IN THE PACIFIC OCEAN.
THE NORTHWEST HAWAIIAN ISLANDS
WHERE PAPAHANAUMOKUAKEA IS A
VERY SPECIAL PLACE, OVER 7,000
MARINE SPECIES.
TALKING ABOUT THE OLDEST
LIVING ORGANISM ON EARTH--
A DEEP SEA CORAL THAT'S 4,500
YEARS OLD IS FOUND HERE.
GHOST OCTOPUS; CREATURES THAT
ARE ENDEMIC, FOUND ONLY IN THIS
STRETCH OF OCEAN, UP TO 90% IN
CERTAIN LOCATIONS, ARE ONLY
FOUND IN THIS STRETCH OF THE
OCEAN.
AND THEN, OF COURSE, ALL THE
MAGNIFICENT MEGA-FAUNA THAT
EVERYBODY SEES IN THE "NATIONAL
GEOGRAPHIC" FILMS, LIKE WHALES
AND TURTLES AND SHARKS AND MANTA
RAYS.
AND THE AMAZING SEA BIRD LIFE AS
WELL.
SO, IT'S A SPECTACULAR PIECE OF
OCEAN, AND WE'RE SO EXCITED THAT
IT'S NOW BEEN PROTECTED IN
PERPETUITY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, HOW DO YOU
PROTECT, SAY, SCHOOLS OF FISH
FROM THIS AREA THAT DECIDE TO GO
OUTSIDE AND BACK IN, RIGHT?
I MEAN, THIS IS ONE OF THE
CONCERNS THAT THE FISHING
INDUSTRY HAS HAD FOR SOME TIME.
>> THERE ARE SOME CERTAIN
SPECIES THAT DEFINITELY GO
BEYOND THESE BORDERS, BUT WHILE
THEY'RE IN THIS HUGE REFUGE--
AND IT'S A MASSIVE REFUGE, IT'S
ABOUT 3.5 TIMES THE SIZE OF THE
STATE OF CALIFORNIA-- THESE FISH
HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO REPRODUCE
AND GROW UNMOLESTED, SO THEY
HAVE AN EXCELLENT CHANCE OF
PASSING ON THEIR GENES AND
REPOPULATING.
>> Sreenivasan: AND PUT THIS IN
PERSPECTIVE OF THE LARGER OCEAN.
I MEAN, WHILE WE TALK ABOUT
THREE TIMES THE SIZE OF
CALIFORNIA, PUT THAT IN
PERSPECTIVE FOR ALL THE OCEAN
THAT'S NOT PROTECTED THIS WAY.
>> YEAH, SCIENTISTS ARE SAYING
WE NEED TO PROTECT UP TO 30% OF
THE OCEAN.
CURRENTLY RIGHT NOW, IN HIGHLY
PROTECTED OR FULLY PROTECTED
MARINE RESERVES, WE HAVE ABOUT
3% OF THE OCEAN.
SO, WE STILL HAVE VERY LONG WAY
TO GO.
THAT SAID, WE'VE COME A VERY
LONG WAY IN A VERY SHORT
TIMEFRAME.
IN FACT, WHEN PAPAHANAUMOKUAKEA
WAS FIRST DESIGNATED IN 2006,
THE FIRST VERSION OF IT, BY
PRESIDENT BUSH, THAT WAS THE
LARGEST PROTECTED AREA IN THE
WORLD.
WE WERE DOWN AROUND .05% OF THE
OCEAN PROTECTED, JUST TEN YEARS
AGO.
AND NOW, WE'RE AT 3% OF THE
WORLD'S OCEANS PROTECTED.
AND THIS, OF COURSE, SETS A
STANDARD FOR THE REST OF THE
WORLD, AND HOPEFULLY A WAKE UP
CALL, THAT WE NEED TO START
TAKING BOLD ACTION, LIKE THE
PRESIDENT JUST TOOK.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT TOOK IT
SO LONG?
WHY THE GAP IN YEARS BETWEEN
WHEN GEORGE BUSH STARTED THIS
AND WHEN PRESIDENT OBAMA
EXPANDED IT?
>> NEW SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION
THAT'S JUST COME OUT IN THE LAST
DECADE, IT'S REALLY NOT THAT
LONG WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT IT
FROM THE SCIENTIFIC PERSPECTIVE.
THEY DIDN'T KNOW ABOUT THE
WORLD'S OLDEST LIVING ORGANISM,
OR THE FACT THAT THESE ENDEMIC
SEA CREATURES WERE FOUND OUT IN
THESE FURTHER DISTANCES.
AND THEY ALSO DIDN'T HAVE AS
MUCH SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION
ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
LARGE-SCALE AND THE INTER-
CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN ALL THE
DIFFERENT SPECIES AND THEIR NEED
FOR SUCH A WIDE RANGE FOR
PROTECTION.
AND THEN, THE SPIRITUAL AND
CULTURAL CONNECTION TO THE
NATIVE HAWAIIANS HAS REALLY COME
TO THE FOREFRONT AS WELL.
>> Sreenivasan: MATT, PUT THIS
KIND OF SPACE IN THE CONTEXT OF
CLIMATE CHANGE, WHAT'S THE
VALUE?
>> YEAH, SCIENTISTS ARE VERY
EXCITED ABOUT THIS AREA BEING
PROTECTED NOW.
FULLY INTACT ECOSYSTEMS ARE MUCH
MORE RESILIENT TO THE IMPACTS OF
CLIMATE CHANGE.
AND THIS PARTICULAR LOCATION,
THEY'RE VERY EXCITED THAT IT
WILL BE ONE OF THE, IF NOT THE
BEST, LARGEST, CLIMATE REFUGES,
CERTAINLY FOR THE OCEAN, BUT
ALSO FOR THE PLANET.
IT'S SITUATED IN THE TROPICS,
BUT ALSO IN THE TEMPERATE OCEAN.
AND ACTUALLY TO THE FURTHER
NORTHERN END OF THE ISLAND CHAIN
AND THE NOW PROTECTED MARINE
RESERVE, THE WATER ACTUALLY
BECOMES QUITE COOL.
SO THE SCIENTISTS ARE HOPEFUL
THAT AS THE WATERS OF OUR OCEAN
CONTINUE TO WARM AND BECOME
ACIDIFIED, THAT THIS AREA WILL
HOPEFULLY BE A CLIMATE REFUGE
WHERE WE'LL HAVE SPECIES, NOT
ONLY CORAL BUT ALSO FISH THAT
ARE THREATENED FROM THE CHANGING
OF OUR OCEAN TEMPERATURES AND
THE ACIDITY.
SO IT WILL HOPEFULLY, AS THINGS
CHANGE, CONTINUE TO BE RESILIENT
AND IT WILL CERTAINLY BE A HUGE
REFUGE FOR WILDLIFE.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM THE PEW
CHARITABLE TRUST GLOBAL OCEAN
LEGACY PROJECT, MATT RAND,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY,
BRITISH BROADCASTER ITV WENT OFF
THE AIR THIS MORNING, LEAVING NO
PROGRAMMING FOR ONE FULL HOUR.
BUT, IT WAS INTENTIONAL.
ITV SAID IT WAS SHUTTING DOWN TO
ENCOURAGE VIEWERS TO SPEND THE
TIME EXERCISING, AS PART OF THE
NATIONWIDE PROMOTION TO GET
BRITS TO USE LOCAL SPORTS CLUBS
FOR FREE TODAY.
SOME COUCH POTATOES TWEETED, THE
ONLY EXERCISE THEY GOT WAS
CHANGING THE CHANNEL.
THAT SAID, A REMINDER THAT IF
YOU EVER GET THE URGE TO EXPLORE
SPACES FAR FROM YOUR TELEVISION
ON THE WEEKEND, GO RIGHT AHEAD.
ALL OF OUR WORK LIVES ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour, ON OUR
YOUTUBE CHANNEL, AND ON DEMAND
THROUGH DEVICES LIKE APPLE TV
AND MUCH MORE.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.